##  Literature Review / Annotated Bibliography
###	Usability Literature
  *Nielsen, Jakob, “Usability 101:  “Introduction to usability”, Nielsen Norman Group, (January 4, 2012), last retrieved from https://www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-101-introduction-to-usability/ on 9 February 2017.
	This is a seminal article for the web-based usability literature that provides an easy to understand definition of what “usability” is, and the five quality components that can be used to assess usability (learnability, efficiency, memorability, errors, and satisfaction).  These five components are included in the Evaluator Checklist format created for this project.  This article also described the relationship between “utility” and “usability” that should result in a “useful” website.  This simple, but powerful concept was used to illustrate the approach that was taken for assessing the communication vehicles associated with a research project and for creating the evaluation heuristics.

  *Mangal, Nimit, “What is usability?”, (2013, September 19), last retrieved from https://nimitmangal.wordpress.com/2013/09/19/what-is-usability/ on 9 February 2017.
	This article is from the blog of a web developer and consultant that contains a useful image of the relationship between “utility” and “usability” that should result in a “useful” website as described by Jakob Nielsen in his “Usability 101” article referenced above.  The image was used in the various presentations of the topic including the presentation at ESIP Winter 2017 (attached as a PDF).

   *UX Mastery.  “UX Techniques”, (N.D.), last retrieved from http://uxmastery.com/resources/techniques/ on 9 February 2017.  
	This article is one of many resources on the UXmastery.com website that provides resources for those user experience and user design professionals from beginner to advanced.  This particular article provided a good list of techniques for assessing usability, with definitions, and explanations for when and how to use the techniques.  For purposes of this project, the most useful techniques discussed in this article were the “heuristic reviews” and “use cases”.

  *UX for the Masses.   “A guide to carrying out usability reviews”, (February 11, 2011),  last retrieved from http://www.uxforthemasses.com/usability-reviews/ 9 February 2017.  
	This article provided an easy to understand way to conduct usability reviews that used as examples the “heuristic review”, and the “cognitive walkthrough”, both of which seemed particularly applicable to this project (in addition to the employment of “use cases”).  It also included a link to a “Usability Review Template” in Excel format that is included as a tab called “Usability Guidelines” on the attached Excel file containing the Evaluator Checklists.   

  *Usability Professionals Association. “Cognitive Walkthrough”, published on Usability Body of Knowledge (N.D.), last retrieved from http://usabilitybok.org/print/cognitive-walkthrough on 9 February 2017.	
	This article provided a very helpful, and easily understandable explanation of the cognitive walkthrough technique, its benefits, advantages and disadvantages, and how to use it.  The “streamlined approach” discussed within the article was particularly applicable for this project.  The article also contained related links that are promising for those wishing to learn more about this technique.

  *Usability Professionals Association. “Heuristic Evaluation”, published on Usability Body of Knowledge (N.D.).  Last retrieved from http://usabilitybok.org/print/heuristic-evaluation on 9 February 2017.
	This article provided a very helpful, easily understandable, but rather extensive explanation of the heuristic evaluation technique, its benefits, advantages and disadvantages, and how to use it.  The technique is tied closely with the work done by Jakob Nielsen, previously cited.   The article also contained related links, references, and more formally published resources that are promising for those wishing to learn more about this technique.

###	Technology Assessment Literature (focusing on NASA’s TRL levels)

  *Zelkowitz, Marvin. V., Software Engineering Technology Infusion within NASA, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 43.3 (1996):  250-61. PDF:  https://www.cs.umd.edu/~mvz/handouts/eng.mgmt.pdf.  
  
  This article was seminal for understanding the importance of the technology infusion process to the broader process of change in the current state of technology practices, using software engineering technologies within NASA as examples.  The article was published in 1996, and therefore, very early in the days of the use of the World Wide Web, so both the example technologies, and the discussions of communication models are dated, albeit historically interesting.  Nevertheless, the distinction that Zelkowitz makes between “technology transfer” (defined as “the adoption of a new method by large segments of an industry” which had been the more published topic) and “technology infusion” (defined as “the adoption of a new technology by an individual organization”) was very helpful for understanding terms that often seemed to be used interchangeably, although not necessarily in the NASA context.  In addition, Zelkowitz’ discussion of the Quality Improvement Paradigm (QIP) used by NASA’s Software Engineering Laboratory (SEL) provided the means to think about an approach that, abstracted, could be applied to anyone investigating a research project or new technology for purposes of assessment or infusion / adoption.   The three steps of the QIP seem simple, but clear, i.e.,  “understanding” the research project or technology, “assessing” it, and standing back to look at the “packaging” of the research project or technology in terms of the documentation or other communication vehicles produced (p.16).  As described by Zelkowitz, the steps are iterative which is important to remember when using the Evaluator Checklist developed as part of this project.   See more about these timing issues in the Development of Assessment Tool section (4) below.  The conclusions within this article are also interesting for those focused upon more specifically upon software engineering practice and technology assessment.    
  
  *Olechowski, Alison L, and Eppinger, Steven D., and Joglekar, Nitkin, “Technology Readiness Levels at 40:  A Study of State-of-the-Art use, Challenges, and Opportunities” (April 1, 2015).  MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5127-15.  Available at SSRN:  http://ssrn.com/abstract=2588524 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2588524.  
  
	This article was very helpful for providing a more updated view than the descriptions in the Zelkowitz article of how the TRL process has been applied within NASA.  The article offered a mapping of TRL levels to system development lifecycle steps that provided a familiar comparison.  The article contained findings about the use and effectiveness of the TRL methodology based on interviews with those who had experience applying them from a number of organizations (including NASA), and from an extensive literature review.  The discussion of which and how other organizations and agencies have used the TRL methodology was helpful to get a better understanding of how the TRL methodology has been or could be adapted.  The list of references from the literature review was very helpful in getting a good, academic understanding of the TRL methodology.  
  
  *Mankins, John C., “Approaches to Strategic Research and Technology (R&T) Analysis and Road Mapping.” Acta Astronautica, 51:1-9 (January 2002): 3-21.  
  
 	In this article, Mankins offers a good overview of the history of NASA’s Technology Readiness Level (TRL) approach to technology management at all levels in an organization.  In addition to definitions, the article discusses how the TRLs were designed to provide information on the current and desired level of maturity of a technology for a particular application.  In addition, there is an interesting discussion about how the developers of an application, or research project for purposes of this discussion, can pull together a “road map” that can guide the advocacy, planning, implementation, and assessment of the technology, and significantly improve the chances for the successful infusion or adoption of the technology / research by others.  The road map, a collection of concepts and documents, can be used as a strategic tool for describing the technological “place” to which the research project and /or technology is headed.  Ideally, the strategic road map should be discernible from the communication vehicles that the research project and/or technology uses to inform others of its goals and objectives (p.13).  
  
  *Kostoff, Ronald N., and Schaller, Robert R., “Science and Technology Roadmaps.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 45:2 (May 2001).  
  
	This article discusses the use of road maps in detail, especially for purposes of enhancing the efficiency of the technology transfer process within science and technology arenas.  Road maps are described as being especially useful as decision aids to improve the coordination of activities and resources in complex and uncertain environments.  One of the specific uses for which road maps are recommended is for enhancing communication among stakeholders of a research project or technology, such as researchers, technologies, product managers, suppliers, users, and others.  Kostoff and Schaller offer common definitions for and characteristics of different types of road maps as well as a detailed explanation of the process for constructing high-quality road maps.  
  
  *Comstock, Douglas A., “Technology Development and Infusion from NASA’s Innovative Partnerships Program.”  IEEEAC paper #1538, Version 3. (updated January 3, 2008). https://www.nasa.gov/pdf/324711main_ieeeac_paper_138.pdf.  
  
	Although NASA’s TRLs are not explicitly discussed within this article, Comstock does provide an organizational context and discussion of the challenges and obstacles for technology infusion within an organization, illustrated by examples from within NASA’s Innovative Partnerships program.  While this context is interesting, the emphasis made upon the need for communication about how the technology or research could be used or adapted by others during the development lifecycle was particularly helpful given the goals of this research.  In addition, the discussion of best practices related to communication for purposes of technology infusion was particularly helpful, as were both the categories of questions that potential infusion decisionmakers usually ask (i.e., those related to performance, schedule, cost, and risk), and the examples of questions within each of the categories.  (p. 9 - 10).   
